Article: Everything Github: Continuous Integration, Deployment and Hosting for your Angular App [WIP] (#7)
angular-schule/website-articles: blog/2020-01-everything-github/README.md

It is also absolutely necessary if you want to work together efficiently in a team.
[Git](https://git-scm.com/) is a free software for distributed version management and is currently the most popular solution.
The leading platform around Git is Github, which belongs to Microsoft since the end of 2018.

### 1.2. Github Actions

[Github Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) is a solution for CI/CD pipelines (continuous integration and continuous delivery).
With actions we can test, build and release our code and while staying in the Github ecosystem.
Github has just recently launched this product to the market and is now directly competing with Travis CI, CircleCI or AppVeyor.
In contrast to former CI/CD monsters it is common with all mentioned providers to express the individual steps in the form of a YAML file and to store this file as part of the source code in the repository.
    
### 1.3. Github Pages

You can use [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) to host a website directly from a GitHub repository.

> This website can either contain completely static content (i.e. pure HTML files and assets, but no scripts running on the server) oder or you can use Jekyll to convert Markdown files to static content.

Reviewer: ~~oder~~

We have no need for Jekyll to enrich an Angular app.
static content is all we need.

### 1.4. angular-cli-ghpages

[angular-cli-ghpages](https://github.com/angular-schule/angular-cli-ghpages) is a project made by Johannes Hoppe, one of the two authors of this article.
His Angular Book uses a new Github repository in every chapter (so there are quite a lot of repos 😅).
So he developed a solution that makes it as easy as possible to bring an Angular App to Github Pages.
The project exists since 2016 and if it was started today, it would certainly have a nicer name.
According to Github, 6800 projects already deploing with angular-cli-ghpages.

### 1.5. GitHub plans

The following information are based on the details from [the pricing page](https://github.com/pricing). 

The **free plan** gives you:
* unlimited public repositories
* unlimited private repositories
* only 3 collaborators for private repositories
* 2000 total action minutes/month

The **pro plan** gives you:

* everything that is included in the free plan
* unlimited collaborators
* 3000 total action minutes/month 

> Back in 2016, GitHub migrated from a pricing based on the number of repositories to a new shema that considers the number of users. **Legacy plans** do not have access to GitHub Actions.

Reviewer: ~~shema~~ => schema

This article will distinguish several times between private and public repos.
The reason behind this is due to the following point, which we must take into account:

**GitHub Pages** is available... 
* in public repositories with GitHub Free.
* in public and **private** repositories with GitHub Pro and all the other paid plans.

| Plan              | Private repos | Actions | Pages for public repos | Pages for private repos | 
|-------------------|:-------------:|:-------:|:----------------------:|:-----------------------:| 
| Free              | ✅️            | ✅️      | ✅️                    | ❌️                      |
| Pro and Higher    | ✅️            | ✅️      | ✅️                    | ✅️                      |
| Legacy paid plans | ✅️            | ❌️      | ✅️                    | ?                       |

Please register an account on github.com, if you haven't already done so.  
**For this article, it is sufficient to use the free plan!**

## 2. A simple Angular app

We assume that the majority of our readers have already worked with Angular. But in order for this article to be as complete as possible, we will very shortly set up a simple website based on Angular.

> 1. If you have not already done so, please install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org), [Google Chrome](https://www.google.com/chrome/) and optionally [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.co) with the [Angular-Schule: Extension Pack](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=angular-schule.angular-schule-extension-pack). Later on we also need [Git](https://git-scm.com/) for the deployment.

Reviewer: Verlinkung falsch: ~~https://code.visualstudio.co~~ => https://code.visualstudio.com

        HttpClientModule // NEW: import HttpClientModule!
      ],
      bootstrap: [AppComponent]
    })
    export class AppModule { }
    ```
  
    For example, we could load a book from our backend at https://api.angular.schule.
  
    ```ts
    // src/app/app.component.ts
  
    import { Component } from '@angular/core';
    import { HttpClient } from '@angular/common/http';
  
    @Component({
      selector: 'app-root',
      templateUrl: './app.component.html',
      styleUrls: ['./app.component.css']
    })
    export class AppComponent {
      book: any = { };
  
      constructor(http: HttpClient) {
        http.get('https://api.angular.schule/book/9783864906466')
          .subscribe(b => this.book = b);
      }
    }
    ```
  
    ```html
    <!-- src/app/app.component.html -->
  
    <h1>Everything Github Demo</h1>
    <h4>deployed with ❤️ and angular-cli-ghpages</h4>
  
    <p>
    This is some dynamicaly loaded content that we hope to find in the Google index later on:
    </p>
  
    <hr>
  
    <h2>{{ book.title }}</h2>
    <p>
      <img [src]="book.firstThumbnailUrl" width="100" align="left">
      {{ book.description }}
    </p>
    ```

>     This example loads data from a remote API. Our hope is that later we will be able to findboth the regular text and as well the loaded book in the index of our preferred searchengine. We have also added Bootstrap to make the result look like this:

Reviewer: ~~findboth~~ => find both
~~searchengine~~ => search engine

    ![Screenshot](screenshot_3_repo-public.png)

6. After you have pressed "Create Repository" a confirmation page will appear.
    You can now connect to GitHub using SSH or HTTPS.
    Both ways will work, but GitHub recommends [HTTPS](https://help.github.com/en/github/using-git/which-remote-url-should-i-use).
    If you are completely lost in authenticating against GitHub, try cloning another repository with [Github Desktop](https://desktop.github.com/) first.
    For the remaining article we assume that the communication has been successful established.

    To add a new remote for GitHub, use the `git remote add` command:

    ```sh
    git remote add origin https://github.com/<username>/<repositoryname>.git
    ```
  
    Replace `<username>` (or organisation name) and `<repositoryname>` with your username from GitHub and the name of your new repository.
    <small>(In our example, it's `git remote add origin https://github.com/angular-schule/everything-github-demo.git`)</small>

7. Finally we can transfer the whole repository to GitHub:

  ```sh
  git push -u origin master
  ```
   
## 4. A first deployment to GitHub Pages

> We are now ready to host our first app on Pages.

Reviewer: ~on Pages~ => on Github Pages

> For this, the project must be compiled first and the compiled asseds should be pushed to a new branch.

Reviewer: ~asseds~ => assets

That functionality is provided by `angular-cli-ghpages`.
GitHub will activate the hosting automatically, if this branch has the name `gh-pages` – which is the default setting for `angular-cli-ghpages`.

1. The following command adds `angular-cli-ghpages` to your project.

    ```sh
    ng add angular-cli-ghpages
    ```

2. Now we can deploy our project to GitHub pages with all default settings.
    The project will be automatically built in production mode:

    ```sh
   ng deploy
    ```

    The deployment will create a temporary git repository and will commit/push all files 
    from `dist/everything-github-demo` to a branch with the name `gh-pages`.
    
    But in this example we haven't provided a target repository.
    In this case the deployment assumes that the current working directory is already a Git repository,
    and that we want to push changes to the same repository with the name `origin`.
    We have prepared this before with the command `git remote add`.  

3. The app should be available at `https://<username>.github.io/<repositoryname>/` soon.
   If it is not immediately available, you should first wait a moment.

> 4. If we now check the results (in our case at https://angular-schule.github.io/everything-github-demo/) we will see a blank page! 😲

Reviewer: Verlinkung setzen

Author: I think, that should resolve to a link, i will double-check!

Author: you were right!

    But no problem, we open the Console panel of the Chrome DevTools by pressing `Control+Shift+I` (Windows, Linux) or `Command+Option+I` (Mac).
    We immediately see some red 404 errors for all files:

    > Failed to load resource: the server responded with a status of 404 ()

    Well, the reason for that is simple:
    The application is configured as if it is running on the root path of the domain.
    But this is not the case here!
    Our application is located in the `/<repositoryname>/` path, so all links are broken.
    This is of course adjustable.
    Therefore, we will try the deployment a second time:

   ```sh
   ng deploy --base-href=/<repositoryname>/

   # so in our case it must be

>    ng deploy --base-href=/everything-github-demo/

Reviewer: I would add a hint like: "don't miss the trailing `/`"

Author: 👍

   ```

5. And now you should see our app running on Github Pages!
    You can make sure that everything went well when you go into the **Settings** of the repo.
    Scroll down there to the GitHub Pages section.
    The following should appear here:

    ![Screenshot](screenshot_4_settings.png)

    **Hint:** You can also see the setting for a custom domain here.
    Please do not try to set a value.
    This will work for the first time, but the setting is not permanent, because `angular-cli-ghpages` will overwrite it again.

## 5. Automating the Deployment with GitHub Actions

But we don't want to stop here and trigger the deployment manually all the time.
We want to make changes to the app and the deployment should be handled automatically for us.
For this we want to use GitHub Actions.
GitHub Actions is now available for all repsitories.
So there is no need to register anymore, we can start right now! 🚀

As with all CI/CD systems, we have to think about how to grant the necessary write permissions to our repo.

### 5.1 About all tokens

The easiest way to grant access to the repository is to implement this with tokens.

> Tokens can be used instead of a password for Git over HTTPS (*this is want we want to do*),

Reviewer: ~want we want to do~ => what we want to do

or can be used to authenticate to the Github API (*angular-cli-ghpages is right now not using the Github API at all*).

> **⚠️ Warning:** Treat tokens like passwords and keep them secret. Always use tokens as environment variables instead of hardcoding them into your code!

At Github there are several types of tokens, which we have to carefully distinguish.
The following two are relevant for us:

* **`GH_TOKEN` / Personal access token** – As the name suggests, personal access tokens grant rights that a particular user has.

>     In order to prevent the release of too many rights, the range of features can be limited with so-called scopes.

Reviewer: scopes maybe in italic when using it with "so called" the first time? _scopes_

Author: maybe like this?

In order to prevent the release of too many rights, the range of features can be limited with so-called "scopes".

        ```
      
        Here we see the very common convention of grouping branches with a slash (e.g. `relase/42`).
        Many git clients will display those groups like folders.

     - As another example, we can run the script every day of the week from Monday - Friday at 02:00:

        ```yml
        on:
          schedule:
            - cron: 0 2 * * 1-5
        ```

   - For more information see [Events that trigger workflows](https://help.github.com/articles/events-that-trigger-workflows) and [Workflow syntax for GitHub Actions](https://help.github.com/articles/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#on).

6. Then, click on **Start commit**, add message and description if you like and click on **Commit new file**.

    ![start commit](./screenshot_5_start-commit.png)

4.  **Done!** 🚀.  
   The action will run by itself the first time.

Next time when you push your changes to Github, Github Actions will run the workflow we created and it will deploy your updated app on Github Pages.

### 5.3 Automate a private repo (via `GITHUB_TOKEN`)

The following example is additional,
because we have promised for this article that you do not have to pay a cent.

> But the the usage of a private repos with Github Actions and Github Pages is only possible from the pro plan and higher.

Reviewer: double "the"

> But the big advantage is that we do not have to set up a token in a tiresome way.

Reviewer: Sentence before starts also with "but", should be changed

If you have not already done so, please read the text on general workflow usage.
The workflow looks very similar, but now we must use the other token.
Here is a shorter example, without the tests:
following example:

```yml
name: Deploy to GitHub Pages via angular-cli-ghpages

on: [push]

jobs:
  build-and-deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
    - name: Checkout
      uses: actions/checkout@v2

    - name: Use Node.js 10.x
      uses: actions/setup-node@v1
      with:
        node-version: 10.x

    - name: Prepare and deploy
      env:
        GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
      run: |
        npm install
        npm run ng -- deploy --base-href=/everything-github-demo/ --name="<Your Git Username>" --email=your.mail@example.org
```

**Et voila!!** 🚀

This is all it takes to deploy the latest version of the Angular App to GitHub Pages with each push.

## 6. Extra: Custom Domains

Finally, we would like to shortly describe how you use your own domain.
GitHub Pages supports custom domains, by placing a specific file in the root directory of the `gh-pages` branch – and `angular-cli-ghpages` will create that file for you.

> <!-- GitHub also provides [detailed instructions for this](https://help.github.com/en/github/working-with-github-pages/about-custom-domains-and-github-pages). -->

Reviewer: the original link should be included

### 6.1 Configuring a subdomain

Setting up a subdomain isn't very hard and if you already own a main domain, then you don't need to make a new investment.
In our example our app should be accessible under the domain `everything-github-demo.angular.schule`.

> 1. First we have to change the DNS for the domain by setting up a so-called CNAME record.

Reviewer: CNAME record in italic? As it will be used the first time with "so called"

Author: i don't like italic! ^^

Author: so-called `CNAME` record

    That CNAME record should point to a domain that looks like this: `<username>.github.io`

    The `<username>` (or organisation name) is in our case `angular-schule`.

>     As an example, the following screenshot shows the required setting for the DNS provider cloudflare.com:

Reviewer: link cloudflare?

Author: Should work, I will double-check

      ![Screenshot CNAME flatteing 1](./screenshot_6_cname-flattening-cloudflare1.png)

      We should also set a `CNAME` entry for `www`, as many people always type in this subdomain.
      The final settings should look like this:

      ![Screenshot CNAME flatteing 2](./screenshot_6_cname-flattening-cloudflare2.png)
    
    * To create an `A` record, point your apex domain to the following IP addresses from GitHub:
      ```
      185.199.108.153
      185.199.109.153
      185.199.110.153
      185.199.111.153
      ```

<!-- ## Summary / What's next? -->
## Summary

We hope you had fun with this tutorial and that your **Angular App** now builds automatically via **GitHub Actions** and that it runs successfully on **Github Pages**. If you have any questions, please contact us via twitter. We are also very happy to receive your suggestion for improvement as a PR.

You can check out the complete demo code here:  
**☞ https://github.com/angular-schule/everything-github-demo/**

<!-- **⚠️ Stop!   
Before you start browsing the web any further:  
Or journey is not over yet!

> Please checkout this [follow-up article from Danny about the static site generator Scully](https://d-koppenhagen.de/blog/2020-01-angular-scully), which is a perfect fit for Angular on Github Pages.** -->

Reviewer: You can uncomment it if you want :P

Author: I would even more favour an article, that is real a follow-up for the readers of this article. But this would need some extra work... 😉

    
### 1.3. Github Pages

You can use [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) to host a website directly from a GitHub repository.
This website can either contain completely static content (i.e. pure HTML files and assets, but no scripts running on the server) or you can use Jekyll to convert Markdown files to static content.
Since we work with Angular, we do not need the static site generator Jekyll.
A good companion is the static site generator [Scully](https://github.com/scullyio/scully), which we will definitely cover in an upcoming article. 

### 1.4. angular-cli-ghpages

[angular-cli-ghpages](https://github.com/angular-schule/angular-cli-ghpages) is a project made by Johannes Hoppe, one of the two authors of this article.
His Angular Book uses a new Github repository in every chapter (so there are quite a lot of repos 😅).
So he developed a solution that makes it as easy as possible to bring an Angular App to Github Pages.
The project exists since 2016 and if it was started today, it would certainly have a nicer name.

> According to Github, 7000 projects already deploing with angular-cli-ghpages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
According to Github, 7000 projects already deplyoing with angular-cli-ghpages.
```

2. Install the latest version of the Angular CLI  globally and create a new Angular project.

    ```sh
    npm install -g @angular/cli
    ng new everything-github-demo --defaults
    ```

3. Now we want to make some small changes to the source code.
    With the command `code .` we open the current directory in the editor.

    ```sh
    cd everything-github-demo
    code .
    ```

4. We are changing the content of the `AppModule` and `AppComponent` a bit to prove that the Google search engine can correctly crawl our website – even with remotely loaded data.

    ```ts
    // src/app/app.module.ts (excerpt)
  
    import { HttpClientModule } from '@angular/common/http';
  
    @NgModule({
      declarations: [
        AppComponent
      ],
      imports: [
        BrowserModule,
        HttpClientModule // NEW: import HttpClientModule!
      ],
      bootstrap: [AppComponent]
    })

>     export class AppModule { }

Reviewer 2: Add a line, to avoid errors when `ng lint`ing.
```suggestion
    export class AppModule { }
    
```

    ```
  
    For example, we could load a book from our backend at https://api.angular.schule.
  
    ```ts
    // src/app/app.component.ts
  
    import { Component } from '@angular/core';
    import { HttpClient } from '@angular/common/http';
  
    @Component({
      selector: 'app-root',
      templateUrl: './app.component.html',
      styleUrls: ['./app.component.css']
    })
    export class AppComponent {
      book: any = { };
  
      constructor(http: HttpClient) {
        http.get('https://api.angular.schule/book/9783864906466')
          .subscribe(b => this.book = b);
      }

>     }

Reviewer 2: Add a line, to avoid errors when `ng lint`ing.
```suggestion
    }
    
```

    Well, the reason for that is simple:
    The application is configured as if it is running on the root path of the domain.
    But this is not the case here!
    Our application is located in the `/<repositoryname>/` path, so all links are broken.
    This is of course adjustable.
    Therefore, we will try the deployment a second time:

    ```sh
    ng deploy --base-href=/<repositoryname>/

    # so in our case it must be
    ng deploy --base-href=/everything-github-demo/
    ```

    **Hint:** Please make sure that you are really adding the trailing the slash.
    If you forget it, it won't work!

5. And now you should see our app running on Github Pages!
    You can make sure that everything went well when you go into the **Settings** of the repo.
    Scroll down there to the GitHub Pages section.
    The following should appear here:

    ![Screenshot](screenshot_4_settings.png)

    **Hint:** You can also see the setting for a custom domain here.
    Please do not try to set a value.
    This will work for the first time, but the setting is not permanent, because `angular-cli-ghpages` will overwrite it again.

> 

Reviewer 2: Just to avoid any un-wanted errors for our readers, add a step to commit and push at the end of 4. A first deployment to GitHub Pages. Otherwise, their pipeline will fail. 😅
```suggestion
6. Now, add, commit and push the changes:
    ```sh
    git add .
    git commit -m "build: add angular-cli-gh-pages"
    git push origin master
    ```
```

    It can be helpful to not have our workflow run on every push to every branch in the repo.
     - For example, this workflow only runs on push events to `master` and `release` branches:

        ```yml
        on:
          push:
            branches:
            - master
            - release/*  # branches matching refs/heads/release/*
        ```
      
        Here we see the very common convention of grouping branches with a slash (e.g. `relase/42`).
        Many git clients will display those groups like folders.

     - As another example, we can run the script every day of the week from Monday - Friday at 02:00:

        ```yml
        on:
          schedule:
            - cron: 0 2 * * 1-5
        ```

   - For more information see [Events that trigger workflows](https://help.github.com/articles/events-that-trigger-workflows) and [Workflow syntax for GitHub Actions](https://help.github.com/articles/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#on).

6. Then, click on **Start commit**, add message and description if you like and click on **Commit new file**.

    ![start commit](./screenshot_5_start-commit.png)

4.  **Done!** 🚀.  

>    The action will run by itself the first time.

Reviewer 2: If you do this [change](https://github.com/angular-schule/website-articles/pull/7/files#r364254872), you can remove this line:
```suggestion
```

> Next time when you push your changes to Github, Github Actions will run the workflow we created and it will deploy your updated app on Github Pages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This action will run by itself the first time and each time when you push your changes to Github.
```

Awesome!

> **ℹ️ Note**
> 
> As already mentioned above, the `GITHUB_TOKEN` (installation access token) will only trigger a release of a new website if the action runs in a **private repository**. In a public repo, a commit is generated, but the site does not change. See this [GitHub Community post](https://github.community/t5/GitHub-Actions/Github-action-not-triggering-gh-pages-upon-push/m-p/26869) for more info. If your repo is public, you must still use the `GH_TOKEN` (personal access token).

If you have not already done so, please read the text on general workflow usage.
The workflow looks very similar, but now we must use the other token.
Here is a shorter example, without the tests:
following example:

```yml
name: Deploy to GitHub Pages via angular-cli-ghpages

on: [push]

jobs:
  build-and-deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    steps:
    - name: Checkout
      uses: actions/checkout@v2

    - name: Use Node.js 10.x
      uses: actions/setup-node@v1
      with:
        node-version: 10.x

    - name: Prepare and deploy
      env:
        GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
      run: |
        npm install

>         npm run ng -- deploy --base-href=/everything-github-demo/ --name="<Your Git Username>" --email=your.mail@example.org

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't we need `--repo` option over here?

Author: That's the new feature of v0.6.2 that I made for this article. The repo is now always discovered from the working directory, so that the token can be always applied! 🚀 

https://github.com/angular-schule/angular-cli-ghpages/commit/c5f7b36c437843f2472a04f1816e331f4fa7d0ff

---
title: "Everything GitHub: Continuous Integration, Deployment and Hosting for your Angular App"
author: Johannes Hoppe
mail: johannes.hoppe@haushoppe-its.de
bio: "Johannes is one of the two founders of the Angular.Schule and the main developer of angular-cli-ghpages. Recently he has been recognized as a Google Developer Expert (GDE)."
author2: Dharmen Shah
mail2: shhdharmen@gmail.com
twitter2: shhdharmen

> bio2: "Dharmen is a full stack JavaScript developer from Ahmedabad, India with core skills in JavaScript and CSS. He enjoys working with both Angular and React. Dharmen contributes to some open source projects and has also contributed to the documentation of angular-cli-ghpages documents. By the way, he is a foodie and loves listening to music, especially Hindi Pop music."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bio2: "Dharmen is a full stack JavaScript developer from Ahmedabad, India with core skills in JavaScript and CSS. He enjoys working with both Angular and React. Dharmen contributes to some open source projects and has also contributed to the documentation of angular-cli-ghpages. By the way, he is a foodie and loves listening to music, especially Hindi Pop music."
```

---
title: "Everything GitHub: Continues Integration, Deployment and Hosting for your Angular App"
author: Johannes Hoppe
mail: johannes.hoppe@haushoppe-its.de
bio: "Johannes is one of the two founders of the Angular.Schule and the main developer of angular-cli-ghpages. Recently he has been recognized as a Google Developer Expert (GDE)."
author2: Dharmen Shah
mail2: shhdharmen@gmail.com
twitter2: shhdharmen

> bio2: "Dharmen is a Husband, Techie, Full Stack JavaScript Developer, Foodie, Hindi Pop Music from Ahmedabad in India. In his free-time he participates on the development of angular-cli-ghpages."

Reviewer 2: Let me know how much white space is still there. I will think of additional content if needed.
```suggestion
bio2: "Dharmen is a Full Stack JavaScript Developer. His core skills are JavaScript and CSS. He has worked on Angular and React, both.
He has contributed to angular-cli-ghpages docs and likes to contribute to open-source projects.
He is a foodie and loves listening to music, especially Hindi Pop music. In his free time, he likes to cook. He is from Ahmedabad, India."
```
